Awesome dev - Release of lesson version 1.0 (#1)
carpentries-incubator/scientific-metadata: instructors/instructor-guide.Rmd

---
title: Instructor guide
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: checklist
## To Do: Before the lesson

- send the link to the "**Episode 1: Getting started**" 2-3 days before the lesson starts. 

> - prepare **group handouts** for the first day by including the challenges 2 and 3. You can find a Markdown template here: LINK

Reviewer: LINK is missing

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Lesson Schedule

<div class="overview card">
  <h2 class="card-header">Day 1</h2>
  <div class="row g-0">
|&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="feather feather-clock" aria-hidden="true"><circle cx="12" cy="12" r="10"></circle><polyline points="12 6 12 12 16 14"></polyline></svg> | Episode | Description |
| :-----: | :---: | ------------------------------- |
| 35 min | [0](#episode-0-housekeeping) | <u>[**Housekeeping**](#episode-0-housekeeping)</u><br>The lesson starts with an introduction by the instructors, and usually the hosting organization, to the learners. The learners introduce themselves briefly and report on their first impressions of the example data object. Scope and schedule of the lesson are outlined. |

> | --- | [1](#episode-1-getting-started) | <u>[**Getting Started**](#episode-1-getting-started)</u><br><i>This episode is not part of the actual teaching content. It will be sent to the learners prior to the lesson. It contains one brief challenge that encourages the learners to engage with the example data object. The learners' experience will be shared during the first Episode 0: Housekeeping session.</i> |

Reviewer 2: It is a bit confusing that the chronological order (for the instructor) does not match the episode number. In the description one starts with the welcome and introduction and then goes into Episode 1:Getting Started, which is prior to the lesson and not part of Day 1. 

In my head, Episode 1 should come in a table of Day -3 😄

> | 80 min | [2](#episode-2-data-metadata) | <u>[**Data & Metadata**](#episode-2-data-metadata)</u><br>The learners get an introduction into data and metadata in everyday life and research contexts. Descriptive, administrative, and structural metadata are distinguished. The learners conduct a guided online search (URLs are provided) and explore the metadata tagging in selected web pages. Good (enough) and worst practices of metadata annotation will be covered in the final talk of this module. The presentation is complemented by a live demonstration, collaboratively extracting metadata from scientific publications. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 80 min | [2](#episode-2-data-metadata) | <u>[**Data & Metadata**](#episode-2-data-metadata)</u><br>The learners get an introduction to data and metadata in everyday life and research contexts. Descriptive, administrative, and structural metadata are distinguished. The learners conduct a guided online search (URLs are provided) and explore the metadata tagging in selected web pages. Good (enough) and worst practices of metadata annotation will be covered in the final talk of this module. The presentation is complemented by a live demonstration, collaboratively extracting metadata from scientific publications. |
```

> | 105 min | [3](#episode-3-structured-metadata---from-markup-to-json) | <u>[**Structured Metadata - from Markup to JSON**](#episode-3-structured-metadata---from-markup-to-json)</u><br>This episode introduces the concept of semi-structured metadata in the context of machine accessibility and interoperability. After defining the term *Markup*, the learners will be confronted with XML and JSON as (meta)data exchange formats. In the challenges 2 & 3, the learners will apply the lecture content to the example data object by extracting metadata from an accompanying `README` file and annotating the example data object using JSON. Challenges will be tackled in groups of 5 - 7 learners. Group results are compared and discussed in a plenary discussion. Ideally, the learners will experience light frustration during result comparison, realizing, that structuring their metadata will result in valid machine-interpretable data objects, yet lack comparability and reusability. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 105 min | [3](#episode-3-structured-metadata---from-markup-to-json) | <u>[**Structured Metadata: from Markup to JSON**](#episode-3-structured-metadata---from-markup-to-json)</u><br>This episode introduces the concept of semi-structured metadata in the context of machine accessibility and interoperability. After defining the term *Markup*, the learners will be confronted with XML and JSON as (meta)data exchange formats. In challenges 2 & 3, the learners will apply the lecture content to the example data object by extracting metadata from an accompanying `README` file and annotating the example data object using JSON. Challenges will be tackled in groups of 5 - 7 learners. Group results are compared and discussed in a plenary discussion. Ideally, the learners will experience light frustration during result comparison, realizing, that structuring their metadata will result in valid machine-interpretable data objects, yet lack comparability and reusability. |
```

Reviewer 2: Here, the groups are 5 - 7 learners but in the General Lesson Information the recommendation is group sizes of 4 - 6 learners.

| 120 min | [4](#episode-4.-enabling-technologies-with-schemas-and-standards) | <u>[**Enabling Technologies & Standards**](#episode-4.-enabling-technologies-with-schemas-and-standards)</u><br>The episode starts with a short history of the World Wide Web from a scholarly perspective, highlighting the benefits of this technology for sharing information. Metadata schemas are introduced in depth by lectures and live coding. Learners practice writing a *JSON Schema* in a group challenge. Subsequently, the written schema is visualized in a web interface, illustrating a possible application. The concept of *metadata standards* is introduced and distinguished from metadata schemas. Some community-independent standards with wide adoption in the scientific context and beyond are investigated. In the following challenge, the learners are introduced to *terminology registries*, practice their navigation and get the opportunity to identify metadata terminologies relevant for their fields of research. |

> | 55 min | [5](#episode-5-web-location-identifiers) | <u>[**(Web) Location and identifiers**](#episode-5-web-location-identifiers)</u><br>This episode is an introduction to the concept and technology of Persistent Identifiers (PIDs) on the World Wide Web. The learners are familiarized with the technology of client-server communication on the web, learn to differenciate between URN, URL, URI, and PID, and get to know  PID services commonly used in the scientific community. Further, the application of (Persistent) Identifiers in metadata records is discussed. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 55 min | [5](#episode-5-web-location-identifiers) | <u>[**(Web) Location and identifiers**](#episode-5-web-location-identifiers)</u><br>This episode is an introduction to the concept and technology of Persistent Identifiers (PIDs) on the World Wide Web. The learners are familiarized with the technology of client-server communication on the web, learn to differentiate between URN, URL, URI, and PID, and get to know  PID services commonly used in the scientific community. Further, the application of (Persistent) Identifiers in metadata records is discussed. |
```

| xx min | [6](#episode-6-outlook---linked-data) | <u>[**Outlook - Linked Data**](#episode-6-outlook---linked-data)</u><br> :construction: UNDER CONSTRUCTION :construction: |

> | 30 min | [0](#episode-0-lightning-talk) | <u>[**Lightning Talk**](#episode-0-lightning-talk)</u><br>An invited speaker presents a real world research example and demonstrates how applied metadata can shape research.  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 30 min | [0](#episode-0-lightning-talk) | <u>[**Lightning Talk**](#episode-0-lightning-talk)</u><br>An invited speaker presents a real-world research example and demonstrates how applied metadata can shape research.  |
```

</div>
</div>

## Episode 0: Housekeeping
<div class="overview card">
  <h2 class="card-header">Episode Schedule</h2>
  <div class="row g-0">
|&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="feather feather-clock" aria-hidden="true"><circle cx="12" cy="12" r="10"></circle><polyline points="12 6 12 12 16 14"></polyline></svg> | Content type | Title |
| :-----: | ---------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| 5 min | **Lecture** | [Instructor introduction](#accordionInstructor1) |
| 28 min | **Group activity** | [Learner introduction](#accordionInstructor2) |
| 2 min | **Lecture** | [Lesson scope & structure](#accordionInstructor3) |
</div>
</div>

**Total time:** 35 min <br>
**Teaching methods:** direct teaching, group activity, discussion <br>
**Learning types:** acquisition, collaboration <br><br>

**Learning Objectives:**<br>
<u>REMEMBER</u><br> 
<ul>
  <li>The participants are aware of the tasks and contact information of the hosting organization.</li></ul>
<u>UNDERSTAND</u><br> 
<ul>

>   <li>The learners get to know the teacher and the other participants. an open and collaborative working atmosphere is created.</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li>The learners get to know the teacher and the other participants. An open and collaborative working atmosphere is created.</li>
```

</ul>

**Description:**<br>

> The lesson starts with an introduction by the instructors, and i.a. the hosting organization, to the learners to the instructors. The learners introduce themselves to briefly and report on their first impressions of the example data object. Scope and schedule of the lesson are outlined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The lesson starts with an introduction by the instructors, and usually the hosting organization, to the learners. The learners introduce themselves briefly and report on their first impressions of the example data object. Scope and schedule of the lesson are outlined.
```

**Talking Points:**

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Instructor introduction

**Slide set**: -

**Time estimate**: 5 min

- Personal instructor introduction

> - Institutional setting if applicable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Institutional setting, if applicable
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Group activity: Learner introduction

**Slide set**: -

**Time estimate**: 28 min

**Material**: whiteboard or shared notes

Guiding questions could be:

<ul>
  <li>What is your name?</li>

>   <li>What is your research topic? (especially helpful when working with a research field heterogenous group of learners)</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li>What is your research topic? (especially helpful when working with a heterogeneous group of learners, from diverse research fields.)</li>
```

  <li>How did you approach the example data object?</li>
  <li>What was easy to identify in the data object?</li>
  <li>What was hard and why?</li>
  <li>What would have helped to understand the data better?</li>
  <li>Based on your experiences, what do you suspect the data to describe?</li>
</ul>

<i>While the learners share their ideas about the example data object, take notes of their answers. These notes can be retrieved at later stages of the lesson, when the example data object is set in context and better understood by the learners to show the progress.</i>

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Lesson scope & structure

**Slide set**: -

**Time estimate**: 2 min

> - brief overview over the schedule, structure and scope of this lesson

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Brief overview of the schedule, structure and scope of this lesson.
```

Reviewer 2: What is meant to be said in this lesson? By `this lesson` do you mean the whole course?  
As in `Brief overview of the schedule, structure and scope of this course.`

On another note, to me it is confusing to call this 2-min part a lecture 🤔 Maybe I don't really know the usage, but I would assume a "Lecture" part includes slides.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Episode 2: Data & Metadata
<div class="overview card">
  <h2 class="card-header">Episode Schedule</h2>
  <div class="row g-0">
|&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="feather feather-clock" aria-hidden="true"><circle cx="12" cy="12" r="10"></circle><polyline points="12 6 12 12 16 14"></polyline></svg> |Content type | Title |
| :-----: | ---------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| XX min | **Lecture** | [What is data?](#accordionInstructor4) |
| XX min | **Lecture** | [The example data object](#accordionInstructor5)  |
| XX min | **Lecture** | [What is metadata?](#accordionInstructor6)  |

> | XX min | **Lecture** | [Descriptive, administrative, structural metadata](#accordionInstructor7) |

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason the time estimates are missing? Do the instructors need to decide for themselves?

> | 15 min | **Challenge** | [Real World Metadata](#accordionInstructor8) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 15 min | **Challenge** | [Real-world metadata](#accordionInstructor8) |
```

| 10 min | **Lecture** | [Metadata in the scientific context](#accordionInstructor9)  |
| 10 min | **Guided confrontation** | [Metadata in scientific publications](#accordionInstructor10) |
| 15 min |  | :coffee: **Break** :coffee: |

</div>
</div>

**Total time:**  80 min<br>
**Teaching methods:**  direct teaching, guided confrontation<br>
**Learning types:**  acquisition, investigation, discussion<br><br>

**Learning Objectives:**<br>
<u>UNDERSTAND</u><br> 
<ul>
  <li>The learners get familiar with the example data object.</li>
  <li>The learners recognize and describe examples of (meta)data.</li></ul>
<u>REMEMBER</u><br> 
<ul>
  <li>The learners name examples for best / worst practice situations in research (meta)data handling.</li>
</ul>

**Description:**<br>

> The learners get an introduction into data and metadata in everyday life and research contexts. Descriptive, administrative, and structural metadata are distinguished. The learners conduct a guided online search (URLs are provided) and explore the metadata tagging in selected web pages. Good (enough) and worst practices of metadata annotation will be covered in the fina talk of this module. The presentation is complemented with a live demonstration, collaboratively extracting metadata from scientific publications.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The learners get an introduction to data and metadata in everyday life and research contexts. Descriptive, administrative, and structural metadata are distinguished. The learners conduct a guided online search (URLs are provided) and explore the metadata tagging in selected web pages. Good (enough) and worst practices of metadata annotation will be covered in the final talk of this module. The presentation is complemented by a live demonstration, collaboratively extracting metadata from scientific publications.
```

## Lecture: What is data?

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/WhatIsData_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>WhatIsData.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**:

1. What is data? (<i>direct this question to the audience and allow them to just shout in. Wait a little, it might be quiet</i> :wink:)
2. We start with an example: Imagine a satellite transmitting data back to earth.
3. This is what actually arrives at the machine receiving the transmission...
4. just a concatenation of signs...
5. we call these **glyphs**. To a human being, this sequence of glyphs is not understandable and it needs some processing by a machine to make it interpretable for humans. And this is data...
6. a **potentially informative object**. 
7. If the data is now processed by the receiving machine, it will be converted in this picture. (<i>The satellite image shows the city center of Cologne, Germany. Feel free to substitute it with a place your learners are familiar with and activate them by asking "Does anyone know, what is depicted?"</i>) In this processed form, the data becomes human-readable. In information science, this is what we call information.

> 8. Knowledge is intrinsified information. For example, knowing where on the image the cathedral is located.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what is meant with `intrinsified`, I also couldn't find this word in any English dictionary.

> 9. The highest level of information content is wisdom, which means putting the acquired knowledge into context, the bigger picture. You might use the satellite image to navigate between to locations, for example. Naturally, as researchers, we strive to reach wisdom with our work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
9. The highest level of information content is wisdom, which means putting the acquired knowledge into context, the bigger picture. You might use the satellite image to navigate between two locations, for example. Naturally, as researchers, we strive to reach wisdom with our work.
```

10. We have seen, that the information content increases by adding context, meaning, and insight to data.

> 11. The take-away message is: Data is **potential information** and needs to be processed and contextualized** to make it accessible for the human audience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
11. The takeaway message is: Data is **potential information** and needs to be processed and contextualized** to make it accessible for the human audience.
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: The example data object

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/TheExampleDataObject_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>TheExampleDataObject.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**:

> 1. Now back to the example data you received from us. (<i>Here you can reflect on some of the statements made during the introduction session.</i>) What actually is represented in the data is this...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Now back to the example data you received from us. (<i>Here you can reflect on some of the statements made during the introduction session.</i>) What is actually represented in the data is this...
```

2. (<i>Empty slide: open <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KeKIBSN2F5c" target="_blank">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KeKIBSN2F5c</a> in a new tab or window and play the video. We start the video from 0:30. </i>)
3. Shown in the data is the ride time (t)...

> 4. the biomechanical acceleration of a human body during the rollercoaster ride in x, y, and z axis... (<i>Yes, the image of the toy bunny is really taken from a peer reviewed journal publication.</i>)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. the biomechanical acceleration of a human body during the rollercoaster ride in x, y, and z axis... (<i>Yes, the image of the toy bunny is really taken from a peer-reviewed journal publication.</i>)
```

5. and a boolean value, stating whether a scream of the test person could be detected or not.

> 6. (<i>allow some time for questions</i>)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. (<i>Allow some time for questions.</i>)
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: What is metadata?

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/WhatIsMetadata_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>WhatIsMetadata.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**:

> 1. What is metadata? (<i>Direct this questions to the learners and wait for them to reply. They might come up with the generic "Data about data".</i>)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. What is metadata? (<i>Direct these questions to the learners and wait for them to reply. They might come up with the generic "Data about data".</i>)
```

2. Often metadata is described as "data about data", or - as Merriam Webster puts it - "metadata is data that provides information about other data". But this is extremely unspecific.

> 3. If you look a bit further, you can find more detailed description of the term "metadata". Admittedly, these text are seldomly...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. If you look a bit further, you can find a more detailed description of the term "metadata". Admittedly, these texts are seldomly...
```

4. fun to read.
5. Let's start - again - with an example. Let's say, you are looking for an informative book about the topic of metadata and decide to look for recommendations online...

> 6. your search will result in about 1,5 million results. But you remember a colleague, that has recently talked about a very good book on metadata...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. your search will result in about 1.5 million results. But you remember a colleague, that has recently talked about a very good book on metadata...
```

7. you ask him about it and he gives you a well-meaning description of said book. "It is black and the title is 'metadata'. It was written by Jeff... Jeff... Something."

> 8. Okay, this is not really precise but you take these information to your favourite search engine and you will most likely come up with this ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. Okay, this is not really precise but you take this information to your favorite search engine and you will most likely come up with this ...
```

> 9. book. Metadata by Jeffrey Pomerantz published in the MIT Press Essential Knowledge series. So far, you have absolutely no idea about the content of the book - the actually data that is hold by it. However, with just a few clues on the title, author, and design, you can identify the ressource. You did this by using "metadata". Let's stay with this example for a bit and take a look inside... 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
9. book. Metadata by Jeffrey Pomerantz, published in the MIT Press Essential Knowledge series. So far, you have absolutely no idea about the content of the book - the actual data that is held by it. However, with just a few clues on the title, author, and design, you can identify the resource. You did this by using "metadata". Let's stay with this example for a bit and take a look inside... 
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Descriptive, administrative, structural metadata

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/DescriptiveAdministrativeStructuralMetadata_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>DescriptiveAdministrativeStructuralMetadata.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**:

> 1. On one of first pages, you will find a lot of information about the book...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. On one of the first pages, you will find a lot of information about the book...
```

> 2. You will get information on author, publisher, keywords and so on, that are descriptive in nature and can help you - or librarians - to successfully identify this specific book. Among these is a very important descriptor...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. You will get information on the author, publisher, keywords and so on, that are descriptive in nature and can help you - or librarians - to successfully identify this specific book. Among these is a very important descriptor...
```

> 3. The persistent identifier. In the example of a book, this is the ISBN number. Whenever you look up this number, the result will unambiguously point to this specific title.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The persistent identifier. In the example of a book, this is the ISBN. Whenever you look up this number, the result will unambiguously point to this specific title.
```

> 4. Furthermore, you will get information about how the book is administered: How it is distributed, who is responsible for its distribution and which conditions need to apply.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Furthermore, you will get information about how the book is administered: how it is distributed, who is responsible for its distribution and which conditions need to apply.
```

5. You can also find information on legal conditions that apply to this resource, such as copyright issues and the terms of distribution. Legal information can be considered as a subset of administrative information.
6. And - really important - you will get a precise idea about the book's structure and how you can navigate it: the chapters, its general content and how it is distributed over the pages. But still: we have not yet read a single word, that actually delivers the content of the book - its data.
7. So, metadata - or metainformation - is more or less structured data, that contains information about characteristics of other data (objects).
8. Let's briefly reflect on the types of metadata, that we came across so far, before we apply these concepts in the first challenge for today: 
  - descriptive metadata holds information about the intellectual content, such as title, author, abstract...
  - administrative metadata specifies how a resource is managed. This can be terms of distribution and copyright information. Regarding published data, this also applies to technical information on the files included in a dataset or versioning...

>   - structural metadata describe, for example chapters in a book, file in a dataset, or software components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - structural metadata describe, for example, chapters in a book, files in a dataset, or software components.
```

> 9. (<i>allow some time for questions</i>)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
9. (<i>Allow some time for questions.</i>)
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor

> ## Challenge 1: Real world metadata

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Challenge 1: Real-world metadata
```

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/Challenge1RealWorldMetadata_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>Challenge1RealWorldMetadata.pdf</a>

**Time:** 15 min 

**Challenge type:** guided confrontation, individual investigation, discussion

**Objective:** <br>

> The learners experience a real world example of functional metadata applications and practice their acquired knowledge on metadata types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The learners experience a real-world example of functional metadata applications and practice their acquired knowledge on metadata types.
```

**Implementation:** <br>
We recommend using a pre-structured, collaborative document 
(whiteboard or notepad) to collect the participants' results.

> Allow for some time for the learners to navigate the websites and explore the metadata in the source code individually (ca. 8 min). Open the source code of one website in the browser and share the screen. Talking points for the guided confrontation can be: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Allow some time for the learners to navigate the websites and explore the metadata in the source code individually (ca. 8 min). Open the source code of one website in the browser and share the screen. Talking points for the guided confrontation can be: 
```

<ul>
  <li>different types of targets (e.g. `twitter:`, `robots:`)</li>

>   <li>different contexts (e.g. `dc:`, `og:`); don't go to deep in this topic and just teaser the existence of metadata standards and references</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li>different contexts (e.g. `dc:`, `og:`); don't go too deep into this topic, just give a teaser about the existence of metadata standards and references</li>
```

>   <li>**Fun fact:** *The Guardian* regularly uses a comment in the `head` of their html documents to advertise IT jobs :grin: </li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li>**Fun fact:** *The Guardian* regularly uses a comment in the `head` of their HTML documents to advertise IT jobs :grin: </li>
```

</ul>

> **White board:** <a href="../files/exampleChallenge1Whiteboard.pdf" target="_blank" download>example set-up</a>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Whiteboard:** <a href="../files/exampleChallenge1Whiteboard.pdf" target="_blank" download>example set-up</a>
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Metadata in the scientific context

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/MetadataInScience_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>MetadataInScience.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**: 10 min

> 1. Now let's shift our focus on metadata annotation in the scientific context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Now let's shift our focus to metadata annotation in the scientific context.
```

2. I'm sure many of us have been in a similar situation. You start a new project that is based on the work of your predecessor or collaborators and you are supposed to start with reproducing the published results...

> 3. You take a look at the accompnying publication and the data looks neat...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. You take a look at the accompanying publication and the data looks neat...
```

> 4. But as soon as you open the underlying datasets, understanding the process on how this data was acquired is not so straight forward anymore. The variables might be hard to understand, there might be missing values, and the data cleaning is not necessarily apparent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. But as soon as you open the underlying datasets, understanding the process of how this data was acquired is not so straightforward anymore. The variables might be hard to understand, there might be missing values, and the data cleaning is not necessarily apparent.
```

5. So you take a look at the experiment's documentation...

> 6. A study by Monya Baker, that was published in Nature in 2016 was able to show, that more than 70% of researchers have tried and failed to reproduce another scientis's experiments. And more than half have even failed to reproduce their own experiments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. A study by Monya Baker, which was published in Nature in 2016 was able to show, that more than 70% of researchers have tried and failed to reproduce another scientist's experiments. And more than half have even failed to reproduce their own experiments.
```

7. The worst practice that you can encounter in your scientific life is surely data, saved under an inexplicit file name with no documentation whatsoever.
8. Slightly better practice are lab notes, which are still widely used as the go-to documentation method in experimental scientific areas. Using lab notes as documentation method, you can facilitate the findability... 
9. by assigning meaningful file names to your data. However...
10. lab notes come with various disadvantages. Lab notes are usually taken continuously and over the course of a 3-year contract, several hundred pages of lab notes can accumulate.

> 11. so even though lab notes allow for some kind of documentation, they are largely unstructured and subjective, rarely following templates or guidelines. The continous note taking makes the documentation hard to retrieve. They are physically seperated from the data they describe and remain in the hand of the experimentator or institution hosting the experiments, which makes them hard to share. And let's admit it, handwriting can be a pain to read.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
11. so even though lab notes allow for some kind of documentation, they are largely unstructured and subjective, rarely following templates or guidelines. Continuously taking notes makes the documentation hard to retrieve. The notes are physically separated from the data they describe and remain in the hand of the experimenter or institution hosting the experiments, which makes them hard to share. And let's admit it, handwriting can be a pain to read.
```

12. One way to store your documentation with your data, is README-style metadata... 

> 13. Just like taking lab notes, Readme-style files can be subjectively written natural text documents. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
13. Just like taking lab notes, README-style files can be subjectively written natural text documents. 
```

> 14. You can also find templates for Readme-style metadata records. Sticking to these templates will allow for increased structure in your documentation records. Now that we document our data digitally, we have increased options to link the metadata record to the described dataset, for example by naming them accordingly...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
14. You can also find templates for README-style metadata records. Sticking to these templates will allow for increased structure in your documentation records. Now that we document our data digitally, we have increased options to link the metadata record to the described dataset, for example by naming them accordingly...
```

15. if you now want to find the results of a specific experiment on your computer, a local keyword search can help you to identify the dataset.
16. To sum up, digital documentation of your metadata in form of Readme-style metadata records, facilitates the linkage of data and metadata, allows for local searchability and increased readability, and the digital nature of the Readme file simplifies targeted sharing of the documentation. However, these records are still rather unstructured and subjective, and only allow for keyword searches.

> 17. If you want to have a look on a well-designed template for Readme-style metadata records, a recommended link is provided in the Episode description.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
17. If you want to have a look at a well-designed template for README-style metadata records, a recommended link is provided in the Episode description.
```

> 18. (<i>allow some time for questions</i>)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
18. (<i>Allow some time for questions.</i>)
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
# Guided confrontation: Metadata in scientific publications

**Slide set:** -

**Time:** 10 min

**Type:** guided confrontation, collaboration

**Objective:** <br>

> The learners apply their acquired knowledge about metadata identification and types on a familiar work situation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The learners apply their acquired knowledge about metadata identification and types in a familiar work situation.
```

**Implementation:** <br>
<ul>

>   <li>select a scientific journal publication of your liking (could be related to the research field of the learners, if the group is homogeneous in this regard.)</li>

Reviewer 2: Are you suggesting the penguin poop article? :)

>   <li>share the journal on your screen</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li>share the publication on your screen</li>
```

  <li>with the whole group of learners, find the "hidden" metadata in the publication and sort the findings into the metadata types (descriptive, administrative, structural)</li>
</ul>

**Creator's recommendation**: <br>

> Use a white board application to display the journal publication. This allows for simultaneous highlighting / annotation of the findings and thus gives a visual response and documentation of the discussion. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use a whiteboard application to display the journal publication. This allows for simultaneous highlighting / annotation of the findings and thus gives a visual response and documentation of the discussion. 
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

<br><br>

---

### :coffee: 15 min Break :coffee:

---

> ## Episode 3: Structured metadata - from Markup to JSON

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Episode 3: Structured metadata: from Markup to JSON
```

| :-----: | ---------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| 5 min | **Lecture** | [Introduction to information transfer](#accordionInstructor11) |
| 15 min | **Lecture** | [What is Markup, XML & JSON?](#accordionInstructor12) |
| XX min | **Lecture** | [JSON step-by-step](#accordionInstructor13) |
| XX min | **Lecture** | [Challenge Introduction](#accordionInstructor14)|
| 15 min | **Challenge** | [Identify metadata in README.txt](#accordionInstructor15) |
| 20 min | **Challenge** | [Write JSON metadata record](#accordionInstructor15) |
| 15 min |  | :coffee: **Break** :coffee: |
| 20 min | **Discussion** | [Challenge reflection](#accordionInstructor16)  |

</div>
</div>

**Total time:**  105 min<br>
**Teaching methods:**  direct teaching, guided confrontation, live demonstration, group activity<br>
**Learning types:**  acquisition, discussion, practice, production<br><br>

**Learning Objectives:**<br>
<u>UNDERSTAND</u><br> 
<ul>
  <li>The learners explain the importance of semi-structured metadata for machine readability.</li></ul>
<u>APPLY</u><br> 
<ul>
  <li>The learners understand, read, and write basic Markdown / HTML / XML / JSON.</li>
</ul>

**Description:**<br>

> This episode introduces the concept of semi-structured metadata in regards to machine accessibility and interoperability. After defining the term "Markup", the learners will be confronted with XML and JSON as data exchange formats. In the challenges 2 & 3, the learners will apply the lecture content to the example data object by extracting metadata from an accompanying Readme file and annotating the example data object in a JSON object literal. Challenges will be tackled in groups of 5 - 7 learners. Group results are compared and discussed in a plenary discussion. Ideally, the learners will experience light frustration during result comparison, realizing, that structuring their metadata will result in valid machine interpretable data objects, yet lack of comparability and reusability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This episode introduces the concept of semi-structured metadata in the context of machine accessibility and interoperability. After defining the term *Markup*, the learners will be confronted with XML and JSON as (meta)data exchange formats. In challenges 2 & 3, the learners will apply the lecture content to the example data object by extracting metadata from an accompanying `README` file and annotating the example data object using JSON. Challenges will be tackled in groups of 5 - 7 learners. Group results are compared and discussed in a plenary discussion. Ideally, the learners will experience light frustration during result comparison, realizing, that structuring their metadata will result in valid machine-interpretable data objects, yet lack comparability and reusability. 
```

**Talking Points:**

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Introduction to information transfer

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/DataTransfertIntro_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>DataTransfertIntro.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**: 5 min

> 1. With the next episode, we are diving deaper into the topic of structured data and enhancing machine readability of our metadata records.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. With the next episode, we are diving deeper into the topic of structured data and enhancing machine readability of our metadata records.
```

2. So far we have been talking about natural language communication. When the senior doctor gives a status update about a patient's condition to his colleague, the information is clear. Let's take this message apart and structure it...

> 3. The message is concering a subject, namely the specific patient in room 305. It includes a location, the room number and it gives information about the current condition, unchanged. Let's assume that both doctors were machines. Extracting these information from the natural language text wouldn't be as straight forward...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The message is concerning a subject, namely the specific patient in room 305. It includes a location, the room number and it gives information about the current condition, unchanged. Let's assume that both doctors were machines. Extracting this information from the natural language text wouldn't be as straightforward…
```

> 5. And the information needs to be structured in particular ways to make it easily transferrable and accessible for the receiving end. One such leightweight data structure is JSON, JavaScript Object Notation. We will take an in depth look at JSON in the upcoming lectures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. And the information needs to be structured in particular ways to make it easily transferrable and accessible for the receiving end. One such lightweight data structure is JSON, JavaScript Object Notation. We will take an in-depth look at JSON in the upcoming lectures.
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: What is Markup, XML & JSON

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/WhatIsMarkupXmlJson_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>WhatIsMarkupXmlJson.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**: 15

> 1. The first term, that we will come across regularly throughout this lesson is Markup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The first term that we will come across regularly throughout this lesson is Markup.
```

> 2. You encounter markup continuously, when you read a text. A period, for example, indicates the end of a declarative or imperative sentence, which results in the speaker briefly stopping to talk, when read out loud. The question mark, on the other hand, declares a question and a speaker will raise their voice before pausing. In this sense, the punctuation - or Markup - is not part of the text or information by itself. It rather give some additional information about the text.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. You encounter markup continuously when you read a text. A period, for example, indicates the end of a declarative or imperative sentence, which results in the speaker briefly stopping to talk, when read out loud. The question mark, on the other hand, declares a question and a speaker will raise their voice before pausing. In this sense, the punctuation - or Markup - is not part of the text or information by itself. It rather gives some additional information about the text.
```

> 3. Essential for functional markup is that the sender - in case of a text the writer - and the recipient - the reader - agree on the interpretation of the symbols used to markup the text. Shown here is an interrobang, a combination of questionmark and exclamation point. (<i>You can reactivate the audience by asking them, whether someone is familiar with the definition of the interrobang or if they would know how to interprete it.</i>) The interrobang was proposed in the 1960s as a new punctuation mark to indicate a rhetorical question. As you might have guessed already, the proposal did not come very far.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Essential for functional markup is that the sender - in the case of a text, the writer - and the recipient - the reader - agree on the interpretation of the symbols used to markup the text. Shown here is an interrobang, a combination of a question mark and an exclamation point. (<i>You can reactivate the audience by asking them, whether someone is familiar with the definition of the interrobang or if they would know how to interpret it.</i>) The interrobang was proposed in the 1960s as a new punctuation mark to indicate a rhetorical question. As you might have guessed already, the proposal did not come very far.
```

4. Markup can be distinguished into four different types:
  - punctuational markup, as seen in the previous examples.
  - presentational markup gives information on how the text should be displayed, which includes vertical or horizontal spacing, page breaks, and enumerations of lists. When enclosing text between two asterisks while writing Markdown, a Markdown interpreter will display this text in bold font face.
  - descriptive or declarative markup gives information on the type or class the enclosed text belongs to. In this example, the text was enclosed by an H1 opening and closing tag. HTML interpreters will now know, that this sentence is the most important headline on the page, regardless of how it is displayed.

>   - referential markup refers to entities external to the document. On ta website, this marked up sentence would appear as a link and redirect the user to the specified URL, when activated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - referential markup refers to entities external to the document. On a website, this marked-up sentence would appear as a link and redirect the user to the specified URL, when activated.
```

> 5. I'm certain all of us have manually marked up a document in one way or another, using a text marker while reading a journal publication or commenting a manuscript while reviewing it. These markups give information to the human reader: What is important in this text? Whis information are missing? Markup in computer files, however, is targetting a machine for interpretation. It declares how the content should be formatted or printed, or give additional information on the written words.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. I'm certain all of us have manually marked up a document in one way or another, using a text marker while reading a journal publication or commenting on a manuscript while reviewing it. These markups give information to the human reader: What is important in this text? What information is missing? Markup in computer files, however, is targeting a machine for interpretation. It declares how the content should be formatted or printed, or give additional information on the written words.
```

6. So from now on in this lecture, the term markup will refer to markup that targets computers, mainly descriptive and referential markup.
7. Descriptive and referential markup, used rigorously, is a way to make data and natural text more accessible for computer analysis and can provide additional information for the human user as well. But we will come to that in a bit.

> 8. We will first shift our focus on the importance of the interoperability of the data formats that we want to use to document our data and metadata. In the 1980s, roughly 10 years before the birth of the world wide web, the internet was already a thing and national and international data networks were emerging fast. This increased the need for standardized data transfer formats to facilitate the data exchange and interpretability on various machines in one networt. One of the first insdustry standards for electronic publishing was the Standard Generalized **Markup** Language or SGML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. We will first shift our focus to the importance of the interoperability of the data formats that we want to use to document our data and metadata. In the 1980s, roughly 10 years before the birth of the world wide web, the internet was already a thing and national and international data networks were emerging fast. This increased the need for standardized data transfer formats to facilitate data exchange and interpretability on various machines in one network. One of the first industry standards for electronic publishing was the Standard Generalized **Markup** Language or SGML.
```

9. With the implementation of the World Wide Web, HTML - the HyperText **Markup** Language - became the standard language for web pages and has its roots in SGML. The markup tags of HTML and their interpretation are well-defined.  XML - the eXtensible **Markup** Language - on the other hand, was developed to transfer and store data on the World Wide Web. The tags are arbitrary, descriptive and can be defined by the user. Let's take a closer look.

> 10. This XML example stores data in form of natural text (<i>point to the two sentences</i>) and a number (<i>highlight the "1"</i>). Each of these data elements is enclosed in a start and end end tag. As mentioned before, these tags can be defined arbitrarily, so we state, that the first sentence is the title, the second sentence is a description and the number one represents a word count. We can now introduce a data hierarchy, declaring that all these data elements describe one example. We could now look for the "title" of the "example" and retrieve the data stored between those tags. XML is software- and hardware-independent and still widely used as a data exchange format. Though XML is human-readable, enclosing the data between start and end tags is quite an effort and meddles with the clarity of this format. So we are leaving the realm of markup languages...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
10. This XML example stores data in form of natural text (<i>point to the two sentences</i>) and a number (<i>highlight the "1"</i>). Each of these data elements is enclosed in a start and end tag. As mentioned before, these tags can be defined arbitrarily, so we state, that the first sentence is the title, the second sentence is a description and the number one represents a word count. We can now introduce a data hierarchy, declaring that all these data elements describe one example. We could now look for the "title" of the "example" and retrieve the data stored between those tags. XML is software- and hardware-independent and still widely used as a data exchange format. Though XML is human-readable, enclosing the data between start and end tags is quite an effort and meddles with the clarity of this format. So we are leaving the realm of markup languages...
```

> 11. to introduce another data exchange format, which is recommended as a standard from the W3 consortium: JSON. JSON is short for JavaScript Object notation. It is inspired by the JavaScript representation for data objects and bears all the advantages XML has shown - like lightweight data exchange, software- and hardware-independency, and hierarchical structure - with an increased human-readability. For the remainder of this lesson, we will learn how to read, write and standardize JSON object literals.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
11. to introduce another data exchange format, which is recommended as a standard from the W3 consortium: JSON. JSON is short for JavaScript Object notation. It is inspired by the JavaScript representation for data objects and bears all the advantages XML has shown - like lightweight data exchange, software and hardware independency, and hierarchical structure - with an increased human readability. For the remainder of this lesson, we will learn how to read, write and standardize JSON object literals.
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: JSON step-by-step

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/JsonStepByStep_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>JsonStepByStep.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**:

> 1. Let's have a closer look on the structure and syntax of JSON object literals. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Let's have a closer look at the structure and syntax of JSON object literals. 
```

2. In this example we have a JSON object, which describes a person named John.
3. Objects are enclosed in curly braces.

> 4. Within these objects, data entities are stored in key-value-pairs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Within these objects, data entities are stored in key-value pairs.
```

5. Keys are always of the data type "string."
6. Data values can be given as one of the following data types. They can be given as...
7. strings. 

> 8. String values can contain any kind of characters and are characteristically enclosed in parentheses. Each string, no matter how long it is, will be interpreted as a single value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. String values can contain any kind of characters and are characteristically enclosed in quotation marks. Each string, no matter how long it is, will be interpreted as a single value. 
```

9. Numbers...
10. can be either integers or floats.
11. Booleans... 

> 12. Boolean values in JSON has one of two possible values. It is either true or false, or 1 for true and 0 for false, respectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
12. Booleans have one of two possible values. It is either true or false; or, 1 for true and 0 for false.
```

13. Null...
14. Assigning the data type NULL does not mean the same as zero but rather that no value was assigned to this variable. You might be familiar with other representations, such as NA or nan. If you read a JSON object into Python, for example, NULL will be parsed as nan.
15. Values in JSON can also be arrays. For example, John has two parents, Anna and Michael.
16. An array is a collection of multiple elements and can be understood as a list of values. The data elements within an array can have the same data type or vary in their data types.
17. Last but not least, a value can be another object. John has a pet and the value of the key "pet" is an object describing John's dog Brutus.

> 18. Again, an object contains key-value pairs. These key-value-paris ar seperated by commata and enclosed by curly braces. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
18. Again, an object contains key-value pairs. These key-value pairs are separated by commata and enclosed by curly braces.
```

> 19. The seperation of data entities by commata in a JSON object literal is crucial.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
19. The separation of data entities by commata in a JSON object literal is crucial.
```

20. JSON is not sensitive to indentations and line breaks. However, significant indenting and line breaking, can increase the human readability of the JSON object literal. Let's compare the JSON representation of this object with its XML representation...

> 21. Both representations contain the same information. In XML the data value is stored between start and end tags, whereas in JSON, the value is assigned to a property and separated from other entries with a comma. Both representations allow for hierarchical data storage as seen for the description of John's pet. In JSON this is done by nesting objects, in XML the data entries are enclosed by `<pet>` tags. A difference can be seen in the representation for John's parents. Whereas an array is given in the JSON object literal, comparable lists do not exist in XML. Here the parents' names are enclosed individually with the same start and end tag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
21. Both representations contain the same information. In XML the data value is stored between start and end tags, whereas in JSON, the value is assigned to a property and separated from other entries with a comma. Both representations allow for hierarchical data storage as seen in the description of John's pet. In JSON this is done by nesting objects, in XML the data entries are enclosed by `<pet>` tags. A difference can be seen in the representation of John's parents. Whereas an array is given in the JSON object literal, comparable lists do not exist in XML. Here the parents' names are enclosed individually with the same start and end tags.
```

22. Besides XML and JSON, the third widely used standard data exchange format is YAML. All three formats can be parsed into one another.

> 23. (<i>allow for some time for questions</i>)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
23. (<i>Allow some time for questions.</i>)
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Challenge introduction

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/Challenge2and3_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>Challenge2and3.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**:

1. In the following challenges, we will apply what we have learned in the lectures so far to our example dataset. 

> 2.You have inspected the data and realised quite rapidly, that you need more information on the data to make sense of it. So you ask your collaborators for additional meta-information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. You have inspected the data and realized quite rapidly, that you need more information on the data to make sense of it. So you ask your collaborators for additional meta-information.
```

3. They reply by sending you a README-style metadata file.
4. However, your funding agency requires that you upload every dataset in your project to their public repository and attach a structured metadata record.
5. In challenge 2, you will review the README-style metadata record and highlight all the information that you deem relevant to understand the data and reproduce the experiment.

> 6. In challenge 3, you will then take these information and transform it into a JSON object literal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. In challenge 3, you will then take this information and transform it into a JSON object literal.
```

7. (<i>The challenges are designed as group challenges. We like to add a slide here, on which we list the randomized groups and give additional technical and administrative information.</i>)

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Challenge: Identify metadata in README.txt / Write JSON metadata record

> The following challenges 2 & 3 will be processed **consecutively in groups of 5 - 6 learners**.

Reviewer 2: Now the groups are 5-6 learners, before it has been mentioned 4-6 and 5-7.

**Total time:** 35 min

**Implementation:** <br>

> Prepare shared notes documents for each group of learners attending the lesson. We have good experiences with copying the challenges into the documents and make space for collaborative working on the tasks. <br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prepare shared notes documents for each group of learners attending the lesson. We have good experiences with copying the challenges into the documents and adding space for collaborative working on the tasks. <br>
```

Try to be present with as many instructors as break-out rooms to moderate the discussions and answer questions.

**Shared notes:** <br>
You can find an example Markdown file for the group handouts <a href="../files/exampleGroupHandout.txt" target="_blank">**HERE**</a>. This document is optimized for use in a Hedgedoc document. 

##### <u>Challenge 2: Identify metadata in README.txt</u>

**Time:** 15 min

**Challenge type:** group activity

**Objective:** <br>

> The learners practice the acquired knowledge of metadata identification in README style text formats.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The learners practice the acquired knowledge of metadata identification in README-style text formats.
```

##### <u>Challenge 3: Write JSON metadata record</u>

**Time:** 20 min

**Challenge type:** group activity

**Objective:** <br>

> The learners create a structured JSON object literal, experience the difficulties in choosing meaningful key strings and value representations. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The learners create a structured JSON object literal and experience the difficulties in choosing meaningful key strings and value representations.
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

<br><br>

---

### :coffee: 15 min Break :coffee:

---

<br><br>

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Discussion: Challenge reflection

**Time:** 20 min

**Implementation:** <br> 
Display the final JSON object literals of the different groups next to each other. Allow for some time, so that the learners can compare the different results and identify similarities and differences. 

**Objective:** <br>

> At this point, the learners should experience some form of frustration - the metadata is now structured and machine readable, yet interoperability and reusability haven't been achieved. This frustration is relieved in the next episode "**Enabling technolgy & Schemas**", when schemas and standards are introduced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point, the learners should experience some form of frustration - the metadata is now structured and machine-readable, yet interoperability and reusability haven't been achieved. This frustration is relieved in the next episode "**Enabling Technology & Standards**", when schemas and standards are introduced.
```

**Leading questions:**<br>
<ul>

>   <li>What was easy generating the structured metadata record?</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li>What was easy in generating the structured metadata record?</li>
```

  <li>What was hard? Which points were intensely discussed in the group?</li>
  <li>Which differences do you see between the different JSON metadata records?</li>
  <li>How do you feel after comparing the results?</li>
</ul>

**Creator's recommendation:** <br>
While moderating the discussion, pay attention to and highlight the following characteristics of the created JSON object literals:
<ul>

>   <li>(if done correctly) all JSON object literals are **valid**, **functional** and **machine readable**</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li>(if done correctly) all JSON object literals are **valid**, **functional** and **machine-readable**</li>
```

  <li>representation of key strings (e.g. camel case vs. snake case, capitalization)</li>
  <li>structure of the JSON object literal (e.g. nested objects vs. flat structure)</li>
  <li>value representation</li>
</ul>

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Episode 0: Housekeeping
<div class="overview card">
  <h2 class="card-header">Episode Schedule</h2>
  <div class="row g-0">
|&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="feather feather-clock" aria-hidden="true"><circle cx="12" cy="12" r="10"></circle><polyline points="12 6 12 12 16 14"></polyline></svg> | Content type | Title |
| :-----: | ---------- | ----------------------------------------- |

> | 5 min | **Lecture** | [Refelction Day 1](#accordionInstructor17) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 5 min | **Lecture** | [Reflection Day 1](#accordionInstructor17) |
```

| 10 min | **Group activity** | [Feedback Day 1](#accordionInstructor18) |
| 4 min | **Lecture** | [Outlook Day 2](#accordionInstructor19) |
| 1 min |  | [Farewell](#accordionInstructor20)
</div>
</div>

**Total time:** 20 min <br>
**Teaching methods:** direct teaching, group activity, discussion <br>
**Learning types:** acquisition, collaboration <br><br>

**Learning Objectives:**<br>
<u>REMEMBER</u><br> 
<ul>
  <li>The learners are familiar with online resources to deepen their knowledge on research (meta)data handling.</li>
  <li>The learners are aware of the content of day 2.</li></ul>

**Description:**<br>

> Day 1 concludes with a brief recap on the topics of the first day. Feedback is gathered from the learners and eventually implemented in day 2. An outlook on the contet of the second day is presented.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Day 1 concludes with a brief recap of the topics of the first day. Feedback is gathered from the learners and eventually implemented on day 2. An outlook on the content of the second day is presented.
```

**Talking Points:**

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Reflection Day 1

**Slide set**: -

**Time estimate**: 5 min

> <i>In this section, the content and topics of the first day are summarized. Use this opportunity to inform / remind the learners of the references / further reading section.</i>

Reviewer 2: Is there a specific further reading section? I went looking for it but I think it is distributed at the end of each episode. 

Maybe here one could say something like: `Use this opportunity to inform / remind the learners that if they wish to know more about any of the topics, there is a further reading section with references at the end of each episode.`

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Feedback Day 1

**Slide set**: -

**Time estimate**: 10 min

> <i>We like to include feedback sessions on each day of the lesson. Of course you are free to skip this part or design it according to your liking. Nevertheless, we want to share our approach, experiences and feedback questions with you </i>:smile:.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<i>We like to include feedback sessions on each day of the lesson. Of course, you are free to skip this part or design it according to your liking. Nevertheless, we want to share our approach, experiences and feedback questions with you </i>:smile:.
```

**Creators' recommendation:**<br>
In order to increase the response rate and to guarantee that every learner is heard, we dedicate 10 min at the end of each lesson day to an anonymous and instantaneous feedback poll. Our preferred online polling tool is [AHA slides](https://ahaslides.com/){target="_blank"}. We share the link to the poll with the participants and allow for some time, so that the learners can navigate the feedback poll in their own pace. We **do not** recommend sharing the results (i.e. presentation mode of the poll) with the learners in order to get individual and unbiased feedback.<br>

<u>QUESTIONS</u><br><br>

1. **How do you feel after the first day of scientific metadata?**
    - :frowning_face:
    - :confused:
    - :neutral_face:

>     - :slightly_smiling_face:

Reviewer 2: Only this one comes out as a yellow emoji 🙂

    
4. **I would have liked to learn more about...**<br>
    [FREE TEXT]

<a href="../../docs/files/exampleFeedbackDay1.png" target="popup" onclick="window.open('../docs/files/exampleFeedbackDay1.png,'popup','width=1200'); return false;" onMouseOver="document.feedbackDay1.src='../../docs/files/CLICKexampleFeedbackDay1.png';" onMouseOut="document.feedbackDay1.src='../../docs/files/exampleFeedbackDay1.png';"><span><img src="../docs/files/exampleFeedbackDay1.png" name="feedbackDay1"/></span></a>
    
(<i>Question 4 is, in our opinion, the most important question of this feedback session. It gives you an insight, which topics might need to be revisited on day 2 and help you to add additional literature recommendation to the references adressing the specific needs of your group of learners. </i>)

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor

> ## Lecture: Outlook Day2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Lecture: Outlook Day 2
```

**Slide set**: -

**Time estimate**: 4 min

<i>Provide a brief outlook on the topics and schedule of the second day.</i>

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Farewell

**Slide set**: -

**Time estimate**: 1 min

<i>You are done for today! But if you like, you can use the last minutes of the first half of the session to take a group picture with the learners</i>  :wink:. 

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: checklist
## To Do: After day 1

> - prepare **group handouts** for the second day by adding the challenges 4 and 5. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- prepare **group handouts** for the second day by adding challenges 4 and 5. 
```

> - review the feedback slides and implement the wishes of the learners in the content for the second day as far as possible. Some wishes might lie outside of the scope of the lesson. In this case, we recommend providing informative links for further reading (e.g. in the group handouts).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- review the feedback slides and implement the wishes of the learners in the content for the second day as much as possible. Some wishes might lie outside of the scope of the lesson. In this case, we recommend providing informative links for further reading (e.g. in the group handouts).
```

**Implementation:** <br>
Supply the learners with a JSON object literal template with pre-defined keys. The learners add their individual values to this template and share it with the rest of the group. We like to use the free-text option of [AHA slides](https://ahaslides.com/){target="_blank"} for this task and present the incoming results on the shared screen. This adds a bit to the interactive and gamified nature of this task but you can use any other collaborative tool (i.e. whiteboard or shared notes) to share results among the learners. While results are coming in, you can use the postings to engage the learners in conversations and comment on their entries. Also, use this opportunity to comment on similarities and differences between the entries in terms of, e.g. how the "key" was understood and the chosen data types.

**Example JSON object literal:**
```json
{
    "firstName": ,
    "ORCID": ,
    "favoriteCake": ,
    "hobbies": ,
    "city"
}
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

> ## Episode 4. Enabling technologies with schemas and standards

Reviewer 2: Is this the long title of episode 4? In a lot of places it is **Enabling Technologies & Standards**

| 10 min | **Discussion** | [Challenge reflection](#accordionInstructor28) |
| 5 min | **Lecture** | [Summary - Annotating the example data](#accordionInstructor29) |
| 15 min |  | :coffee: **Break** :coffee: |
| 4 min | **Lecture** | [Metadata standards](#accordionInstructor30) |
| 1 min | **Lecture** | [Challenge introduction](#accordionInstructor31) |
| 4 min | **Challenge** | [Metadata standards](#accordionInstructor32) |

</div>
</div>

**Total time:** 120 min <br>
**Teaching methods:** direct teaching, group activity <br>
**Learning types:** acquisition, practice, collaboration, production <br><br>

**Learning Objectives:**<br>
<u>REMEMBER</u>
<ul>
  <li>The learners memorize the meaning of the World Wide Web as a product of and tool for the scientific community.</li>
  <li>The learners are familiar with online registries for metadata terminologies</li> 
</ul>
<u>UNDERSTAND</u>
<ul>
  <li>The learners contrast the terms "metadata schema" and "metadata standard."</li>
</ul>
<u>APPLY</u><br> 
<ul>
  <li>The learners understand, read and write XML and JSON Schema.</li>
  <li>The learners navigate online terminology registries. </li>
</ul>

**Description:**<br>

> The episodes starts with a short history of the World Wide Web from a scholarly perspective, highlighting the benefits of this technology for sharing information. Metadata schemas are introduced in depth by lectures and live coding. JSON Schema development is further practiced by the learners in a group challenge. Subsequently, the written schema is applied in web interfaces. The concept of metadata standards is introduced and distinguished from metadata schemas. Widely used and scientific community independent standards are investigated. In the following challenge, the learners are introduced to terminology registries, practice their navigation and get the opportunity to identify metadata terminologies relevant for their fields of research.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The episode starts with a short history of the World Wide Web from a scholarly perspective, highlighting the benefits of this technology for sharing information. Metadata schemas are introduced in depth by lectures and live coding. Learners practice writing a *JSON Schema* in a group challenge. Subsequently, the written schema is visualized in a web interface, illustrating a possible application. The concept of *metadata standards* is introduced and distinguished from metadata schemas. Some community-independent standards with wide adoption in the scientific context and beyond are investigated. In the following challenge, the learners are introduced to *terminology registries*, practice their navigation and get the opportunity to identify metadata terminologies relevant for their fields of research.
```

Reviewer 2: I suggested the changes from the episode description in the general schedule on top. It seems it is the same text which has already been revised.

**Time estimate**: 10 min

1. Before we dive deeper into the topic of metadata and how we can make it more accessible, we would like to travel a few decades back to the beginnings of the World Wide Web.
2. After three decades, browsing the internet, catching up with friends and family on social media, online shopping and streaming the latest shows, we tend to forget that the World Wide Web was actually created by and for the scientific community. 
3.When the researchers Tim Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau - both working at the CERN research centre - proposed their idea of the World Wide Web, they intended to meet the demand for automated information-sharing between **scientists in universities and institutes around the world**. So the World Wide Web was, from its beginning, meant to facilitate scientific data exchange.
4. And even long before the World Wide Web, the scientific community developed protocols that enabled the digital sharing of data, such as hypertext in the 1960s, the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) in the 1970s and Mail Transfer Protocols in the 1980s.

> 5. Based on these early protocols, the building blocks of todays World Wide Web were developed. HTML is still the standard markup language for documents designed to be interpreted by and displayed in web browsers. The HyperText Transfer Protocol, which is an application layer protocol to ensure client server communication on the Web. And URIs, Uniform Resource Identifiers, which uniquely identify resources on the web and ensure their accessibility and retrievability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Based on these early protocols, the building blocks of today's World Wide Web were developed. HTML is still the standard markup language for documents designed to be interpreted by and displayed in web browsers. The HyperText Transfer Protocol, which is an application layer protocol to ensure client-server communication on the Web. And URIs, Uniform Resource Identifiers, which uniquely identify resources on the web and ensure their accessibility and retrievability.
```

6. We will come back to this technology later in this lesson in more detail.

> 7. A crucial element for the broad implementation of the World Wide Web was the creation of a web browser to interpret and display HTML documents that is compatible across various operating systems. This actually achieved Nicola Pellow in 1990, who, at this time, was an undergraduate intern at CERN (<i>little feminist side note</i> :wink:).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. A crucial element for the broad implementation of the World Wide Web was the creation of a web browser to interpret and display HTML documents that are compatible across various operating systems. This was actually achieved by Nicola Pellow in 1990, who, at this time, was an undergraduate intern at CERN (<i>little feminist side note</i> :wink:).
```

> 8. Within the scientific community, the World Wide Web was an immediate success. Already in 1991, the arXiv preprint repository switched from email dissemination of manuscripts to HTTP. The picture on the right gives an insight how scientific article were distributed before the World Wide Web. You couldn't simply click on any article that you found on Google Scholar and download it - provided it isn't hidden behind a pay wall - and decide later, whether it was helpful or not. You needed to exactly know, which article you want to study, contact the archiving repository, wait for an actual human being to retrieve the article, scan it and send it back to you. (<i>To reactivate the learners, you can ask them at this point, who has a folder on their drive for "unread articles" or "articles to read".</i>). The first German institute to connect a web server to the Web, was the "Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY. (<i>Well, the lesson was created within the Helmholtz Association in Germany, which makes this a nice Fun Fact for the original audience.</i>). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. Within the scientific community, the World Wide Web was an immediate success. Already in 1991, the arXiv preprint repository switched from email dissemination of manuscripts to HTTP. The picture on the right gives an insight into how scientific articles were distributed before the World Wide Web. You couldn't simply click on any article that you found on Google Scholar and download it - provided it isn't hidden behind a paywall - and decide later, whether it was helpful or not. You needed to exactly know, which article you want to study, contact the archiving repository, wait for an actual human being to retrieve the article, scan it and send it back to you. (<i>To reactivate the learners, you can ask them at this point, who has a folder on their drive for "unread articles" or "articles to read".</i>). The first German institute to connect a web server to the Web, was the "Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY. (<i>Well, the lesson was created within the Helmholtz Association in Germany, which makes this a nice Fun Fact for the original audience.</i>). 
```

9. Today the web hosts so many repositories - for research articles and data, global, local, research field overarching or specific - that it becomes hard to find the right repository for the resource you want to retrieve or upload. Needless to say that you can find several repositories for repositories online. To sum it up, the World Wide Web was originally created to share data between scientists and scientific institutions and it succeeded so well, that today it is barely imaginable to conduct research without the web.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Metadata schemas

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/MetadataSchemas_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>MetadataSchemas.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**: 10 min

> 1. Even though the World Wide Web has provided the means of sharing information with individuals and broad communities easily, we have experienced yesterday and in our daily live as researchers, that simply sharing data does not guarantee the reusability of these information. And we have all experienced the yearning for guidelines on how these information should be provided. So we will now introduce you to metadata schemas. (<i>You can also show a slide with the JSON object literal results from day 1 at this point or learner quotes from the result discussion of Challenge 3.</i>)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Even though the World Wide Web has provided the means of sharing information with individuals and broad communities easily, we have experienced yesterday and in our daily lives as researchers, that simply sharing data does not guarantee the reusability of this information. And we have all experienced the yearning for guidelines on how this information should be provided. So we will now introduce you to metadata schemas. (<i>You can also show a slide with the JSON object literal results from day 1 at this point or learner quotes from the result discussion of Challenge 3.</i>)
```

2. With a metadata schema, it is possible to express expectations on how a metadata record should be structured and even enforce this structure.

> 3. An example for enforced - or validated - data submission we are probably all familiar with, is the classic customer information form, that you need to fill, when you are placing an order in an online shop. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. An example of enforced - or validated - data submission we are probably all familiar with, is the classic customer information form that you need to fill out when placing an order in an online shop. 
```

> 4. We know these asterisks, that tell us, that these data entries are required. Some entries only allow string values, like the name, or specific formats, like e-mail addresses and will throw an error as soon as you diverge from the expected data type or format. Or you have a fixed subset of values, which you can pick from a drop-down list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. We know these asterisks tell us that these data entries are required. Some entries only allow string values, like the name, or specific formats, like e-mail addresses and will throw an error as soon as you diverge from the expected data type or format. Or you have a fixed subset of values, which you can pick from a drop-down list.
```

> 5. If you press submit, the data in this form will be validated and, if it passes this validation, stored or used in other applications. Which means, that it will be stored and transmitted in a lightweight data format, such as JSON.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. If you press submit, the data in this form will be validated and, if it passes this validation, stored or used in other applications. This means that it will be stored and transmitted in a lightweight data format, such as JSON.
```

6. The titles of the fields, specify the keys - or properties of the JSON object...

> 7. which are assigned their respective values.

Reviewer 2: I think slide 7 is pointing to the descriptions in each field and not the assigned values

> 8. For metadata records in general, these conventions or constrains can be set by metadata schemas. These schemas are defined in the same data format as the expected metadata record, such as XML or JSON. Again, this allows for parsing and automated validation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. For metadata records in general, these conventions or constraints can be set by metadata schemas. These schemas are defined in the same data format as the expected metadata record, such as XML or JSON. Again, this allows for parsing and automated validation.
```

9. This means, XML schemas are written in XML and JSON Schema is written in JSON. So far, we have written JSON object literals and we will be further focusing on JSON...

> 10. so we will take a deeper look on JSON Schema.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
10. so we will take a deeper look at JSON Schema.
```

> 11. On the right, you see a simple JSON Schema, which follows the JSON Schema conventions. This is indicated by the "$schema"-key. The `$`-sign in JSON indicates to a reference and we can give the schema-specifications as URL. We will tackle the topic of referencing in metadata records later in this lesson.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
11. On the right, you see a simple JSON Schema, which follows the JSON Schema conventions. This is indicated by the "$schema"-key, which is used as a version identifier and points to the location of the schema specification. The value of this keyword must be a URI. We will tackle the topic of referencing in metadata records later in this lesson.
```

Reviewer 2: Here, several things were confusing:
- do you want to explain about `$`-sign in JSON or the "$schema" keyword.
- something about the versioning is worth mentioning 
- you say "we can give" the specification as a URL. That sounds like it's optional to give it, is this true? 

Maybe a bit of reformulation is needed here.

Reviewer 2: Also, the next slides get the blue highlighter, maybe it would be nice to have it in slide 11 for the `$schema` specification. It would also focus the slide only on the first line of the schema, as I would be tempted to describe the full thing, and later realize the next slides are about that. So, one could also give the `...` in this talking point.

> 12. The schema specifies keys - or properties - that require to enter a data value. In this case...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
12. The schema specifies keys - or properties - that are required to enter a data value. In this case...
```

13. The superhero property is required and expects an entry of data type: string.
14. A second property is defined: power. However, power is not listed in the required properties, so it is optional.
15. Coming back to the data types: This schema describes a JSON **object** in which the superhero-value should be a **string** and the power-value needs to be of data type **integer**. And for the human reader, some meaningful descriptions are added to describe the individual properties.

> 16. So based on this example schema, the object on top would be valid. A string-value is assigned to the required property. The bottom object, however, does not conform with the schema and would throw an error, as the value data type is not a string. **It is important to know, that schema validation only checks for syntactical validity. In this case, it only checks, whether the object contains the required property:value pair and whether the value conforms with the expected data type. To prevent nonsensical values, a meaningful property description can be of great help."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
16. Based on this example schema, the object on top would be valid. A string value is assigned to the required property. The bottom object, however, does not conform with the schema and would throw an error, as the value data type is not a string. **It is important to know**, that schema validation only checks for syntactical validity. In this case, it only checks, whether the object contains the required property, the corresponding value and whether the value conforms with the expected data type. To prevent nonsensical values, a meaningful property description can be of great help."
```

> 17. <i>(allow for some time for questions)</i>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
17. <i>(Allow some time for questions.)</i>
```

> 18v. Before we write a JSON Schema for our roller coaster experiment data, let's get back to the customer information form and design a JSON Schema, that enforces the data entries for this form together.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
18. Before we write a JSON Schema for our roller coaster experiment data, let's get back to the customer information form and design a JSON Schema together, that enforces the data entries for this form.
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
# Guided confrontation: Live coding a JSON Schema

The concept of a schema can be overwhelming for learners with little to no prior knowledge. To prepare the learners for Challenge 4, we recommend to include an **interactive live coding session**. The following instructions and suggestions are based on the narrative we follow in our course set-up.

**Time**: 8 min

**Instructor material**: <br>
<ul>
  <li><a href="../files/customerInformationForm.png" target="_blank" download>customerInformationForm.png</a></li> 

>   <li><a href="../files/customerInformationForm_schemaSolution.json" target="_blank" download>customerInformationForm_schemaSolution.json</a></li>

Reviewer 2: superpowers 🦸🏽‍♀️

</ul>

> **Creators recommendation**: <br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Creator's recommendation**: <br>
```

<ul>  

>   <li>Introduce a customer information form as an example for data validation / enforcement in your lecture (see also: */include teaching script anchor/*).</li>

Reviewer 2: */include teaching script anchor/* ... ToDo??

  <li>Open the image of the customer information form and an empty JSON file in **split-screen view**.</li>
</ul>
<a href="../../docs/files/liveCodingScreenshot.png" target="popup" onclick="window.open('../docs/files/liveCodingScreenshot.png,'popup','width=1200'); return false;" onMouseOver="document.liveCoding.src='../../docs/files/CLICKliveCodingScreenshot.png';" onMouseOut="document.liveCoding.src='../../docs/files/liveCodingScreenshot.png';"><span>

> <img src="files/liveCodingScreenshot.png" alt="Screenshot of the recommended live coding session." width="800" name="liveCoding"/></span></a>

Reviewer 2: superpowers 🦸🏽‍♀️

<ul>
  <li>For live coding, we recommend using an **IDE** with **JSON syntax highlighting** (e.g. VS Code)</li>
</ul>

**Narrative / Teaching script**: <br>
<ul>
  <li>*start off with 2 indentations*</li>
  <li>demonstrate specifying the first property in the form `"Full Name"` by entering a meaningful `"description"` and `"type":"string"`</li>
  <li> encourage the learners to shout out the values (and keys), that specify the subsequent form properties.</li>
  <li> highlight the following aspects: </li>
    <ul>
      <li>`"Country/Region"`: to restrict a value to a fixed set of values, the keyword `"enum"` is used. Fixed values are specified in an `array` of unique elements.</li>

>       <li>`"Number of super powers"`: introduce `"type":"number"`</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      <li>`"Number of superpowers"`: introduce `"type":"number"`</li>
```

Reviewer 2: superpower is one word, I also noticed it in the screenshots.

>       <li>`"E-mail"`: introduce the `"format"`-keyword. `"format":"email"` validates against the correct formatting of an e-mail address (`someString` - `@-sign` - `domain name`). However, it does check, whether the e-mail address exists.</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      <li>`"E-mail"`: introduce the `"format"`-keyword. `"format":"email"` validates against the correct formatting of an e-mail address (`someString` - `@-sign` - `domain name`). However, it does not check, whether the e-mail address exists.</li>
```

      <li>`"Date of birth"`: specify `date`-format.</li>
    </ul>
  <li> **The specified keywords represent the `"properties"` of the `customerInformation`-object**</li>
  <li> the `"properties"`-key of a JSON Schema object takes a value of data type `object` -> *enclose the specified field-objects in curly brackets*</li>
  <li> collaboratively define the JSON Schema keys `"title"`, `"description"`, and `"type"`</li>
  <li> highlight, that a JSON Schema is a **JSON object literal** -> *enclose the schema-object in curly brackets*</li>

>   <li> Finally, draw the learners attention to the **mandatory** fields in the customer information form and introduce the `"required"`-keyword</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li> Finally, draw the learners' attention to the **mandatory** fields in the customer information form and introduce the `"required"`-keyword</li>
```

</ul>

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Challenge introduction

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/ChallengeIntroduction_4_5_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>Challenge4and5.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**: 5 min

1. Let's briefly recap on the most important characteristics of a JSON Schema.
  - each of the properties in the schema are described in objects.
  - the data type of a property is specified by the key `type`.
  - if you want to further specify the format of a data entry, use the key `format`.
  - mandatory data entries are given by the key `required` in an array.
  - for controlled lists, you specify the given values in an array and the key `enum`.
2. The complete specifications for JSON Schema can be found on json-schema.org.
3. If you develop a schema, that is supposed to be used by a group of people, the most challenging part can be to have everyone agree on the same expectations.

> 3. <i>(Allow for some time for questions.)</i>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. <i>(Allow some time for questions.)</i>
```

> 4. We will now head back to our roller coaster data. In your collaboration you spend some time in discussing your expectations on the metadata, that is necessary to record with the data. But finally you have created an example JSON object, basically the ideal metadata record for the experiment within your collaboration. To enforce this metadata structure, you want to write a JSON schema. As this can get very lengthy...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. We will now head back to our roller coaster data. In your collaboration, you spend some time discussing your expectations on the metadata that is necessary to record with the data. But finally, you have created an example JSON object, basically the ideal metadata record for the experiment within your collaboration. To enforce this metadata structure, you want to write a JSON schema. As this can get very lengthy...
```

5. you agree to distribute the schema definition amongst the collaborators.

> 6. We will now head back to the breakout rooms in groups and work on Challenge 4 and 5. In challenge 4 you will discuss and develop an excerpt of the roller coaster JSON schema.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. We will now head back to the breakout rooms in groups and work on challenges 4 and 5. In challenge 4, you will discuss and develop an excerpt of the roller coaster JSON schema.
```

7. And in Challenge 5 you will be introduced to an online tool, with which you can put your work invested into the schema into use.
8. (<i>Specify the time, when the learners are expected to be back in the lecture setting.</i>)

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Challenge: JSON schema / Form input & validation with JSON schema

> The following challenges 4 & 5 will be processed **consecutively in groups of 5 - 6 learners**.

Reviewer 2: groups of 5 - 6 learners, compare with other instructions where the number was different

> We made the experience, that changing the group composition for these tasks benefits the overall collaborative atmosphere. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our experience, that changing the group composition for these tasks benefits the overall collaborative atmosphere. 
```

Reviewer 2: What is the meaning of changing the group composition?

**Total time:** 30 min

**Implementation:** <br>

> In accordance with challenges 2 & 3, we recommend using a pre-structured shared notes document with the gorups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As in challenges 2 & 3, we recommend using a pre-structured shared notes document with the groups.
```

**Shared notes:** <br>
You can find an example Markdown file for the group handouts <a href="../files/exampleGroupHandout.txt" target="_blank">**HERE**</a>. This document is optimized for use in a Hedgedoc document. 

##### <u>Challenge 4: JSON Schema</u>

**Time:** 20 min

**Challenge type:** group activity, production

**Objective:** <br>

> By writing a short excerpt of a JSON schema, the learner get familiar with the schema syntax, gain the ability to read and understand a schema, and get to know some important JSON schema keywords. By writing the schema in a group set-up, the learner experience the discussion process as a crucial part of schema development.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By writing a short excerpt of a JSON schema, the learner gets familiar with the schema syntax, gains the ability to read and understand a schema, and gets to know some important JSON schema keywords. By writing the schema in a group set-up, the learner experiences the discussion process as a crucial part of schema development.
```

##### <u>Challenge 5: Form input & validation with JSON schema</u>

**Time:** 10 min

**Challenge type:** group activity **OR** individual exploration

**Objective:** <br>

> By downloading and inspecting the final JSON schema, the learners comprehend the complexity a metadata schema can acquire. With the implementation of the schema in the UI of the react-jsonschema-form playground, the learners bring the developed schema into use, get to know a software tool, they can benefit from, and experience relieve of the frustration after Challenge 3.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By downloading and inspecting the final JSON schema, the learners comprehend the complexity a metadata schema can acquire. With the implementation of the schema in the UI of the react-jsonschema-form playground, the learners bring the developed schema into use, get to know a software tool, they can benefit from, and experience relief from the frustration after Challenge 3.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe add the [react-jsonschema-form playground](https://rjsf-team.github.io/react-jsonschema-form/) link

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Discussion: Challenge reflection

**Time:** 10 min

**Implementation:** <br>
<ul>
  <li>share the [react-jsonschema-form playground](https://rjsf-team.github.io/react-jsonschema-form/){target="_blank"} pre-filled with the final schema and metadata values in your browser **OR**</li>
  <li>share the final **JSON schema** on your screen **OR**</li>
  <li>display the final **JSON metadata records** (`exampleDataObject.json`) of each group next to each other</li>
</ul>

**Objective:** <br>

> The learners are aware of the advantages of a metadata schema and metadata record validation, pay attention to interface interpretations in the proposed tool and feel relieve of the frustration experienced after challenge 3 based on the metadata record harmonization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The learners are aware of the advantages of a metadata schema and metadata record validation, pay attention to interface interpretations in the proposed tool and feel relieved of the frustration experienced after challenge 3 based on the metadata record harmonization.
```

Reviewer 2: what is based on the metadata record harmonization?

**Leading questions:**<br>
<ul>
  <li>How does the browser display lists of pre-defined values (specified as `enum` in the schema)?</li>
  <li>How are `arrays` and `objects` interpreted in the form interface?</li>

>   <li>What happens if you enter an invalid value (e.g. try to enter a string for the test persons `height`)</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li>What happens if you enter an invalid value (e.g. try to enter a string for the test person's `height`)</li>
```

  <li>What happens if you enter a nonsense value (e.g. try to enter a nonsense string for `rideName`)</li>

>   <li>How does the web service respond if you click on submit without filling all the "required" fields?</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li>How does the web service respond if you click on submit without filling out all the "required" fields?</li>
```

</ul>

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Summary - Annotating the example data

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/SummaryExampleDataAnnotation_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>SummaryExampleDataAnnotation.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**: 5 min

(<i>Challenge 5 concludes the work with the example dataset. At this point we like to give a brief summary about the metadata annotation process</i>)

> 1. Let's have a last look on our roller coaster data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Let's have a last look at our roller coaster data.
```

6. By structuring our metadata records as JSON objects...
7. we made the information not only findable but also accessible to machines. As we put some effort into developing a schema for the metadata records, we can make sure, that experiments in the same study and collaboration, are recorded and annotated in the same way, which increases its reusability...
8. and ensures, that metadata records can be validated.
9. (<i>If you like, recommend some tools that support and facilitate metadata annotation and validation.</i>)

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

<br><br>

---

### :coffee: 15 min Break :coffee:

---

<br><br>

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Metadata standards

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/MetadataStandards_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>MetadataStandards.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**: 4 min

1. We have been discussing metadata schemas to enforce, harmonize and validate metadata records. But you might have heard the term metadata standards. So where is the difference?

> 2. Basically, a metadata standard is a metadata schema. And a schema can become a standard, when it is well established, endorsed and widely accepted by its user community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Basically, a metadata standard is a metadata schema. A schema can become a standard when it is well-established, endorsed, and widely accepted by its user community.
```

> 3. One of the best known, generic and widely used metadata standard for online resources, is the Dublin Core. The Dublin Core was developed by a consortium of researchers, librarians and web technologists in 1995 during a meetin in Dublin, Ohio, and was born by the need for a unified description of resources on the web. The design of the Dublin Core was inspired by the library cards as they are still used to catalog book resources in physical libraries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. One of the best-known, generic, and widely used metadata standard for online resources, is the Dublin Core. The Dublin Core was developed by a consortium of researchers, librarians, and web technologists in 1995 during a meeting in Dublin, Ohio, and was born by the need for a unified description of resources on the web. The design of the Dublin Core was inspired by the library cards as they are still used to catalog book resources in physical libraries.
```

> 4. When we are talking about online resources, we talk any information entity that can be retrieved from the web, such as websites, metadata and data files, images, videos and so on. In the scientific context, "resource" can also refer to experimental data, protocols, or software code. Have you published anything under your name online. Guess what: in terms of the world wide web, you are a resource, too!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. When we are talking about online resources, we talk about any information entity that can be retrieved from the web, such as websites, metadata and data files, images, videos, and so on. In the scientific context, "resource" can also refer to experimental data, protocols, or software code. Have you published anything under your name online? Guess what: in terms of the world wide web, you are a resource, too!
```

> 5. To enhance the identification and findability of these resources, the Dublin Core Initiative have specified a set of 15 metadata elements to describe any type of resource on the Web. These core elements hold information on the creators, format and type, and detailed descriptions of the resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. To enhance the identification and findability of these resources, the Dublin Core Initiative has specified a set of 15 metadata elements to describe any type of resource on the Web. These core elements hold information on the creators, format and type, and detailed descriptions of the resource.
```

> 6. Remember the first challenge we approached yesterday. When looking up metadata elements in the head-elements of websites...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Remember the first challenge we approached yesterday? When looking up metadata elements in the <head> elements of websites...
```

7. some properties were given as `dc:`, such as - in this example - `dc:creator`, directly stating, that this entry conforms with the `creator` element of the `Dublin Core` metadata standard.

> 8. The Dublin Core is just one of many implemented and endorsed metadata standards. On the general online resource description, Facebooks Open Graph and schema.org became industry metadata standards. But, you guessed it, there are multiple community specific and scientific metadata standards, that describe scientific resources in more detail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. The Dublin Core is just one of many implemented and endorsed metadata standards. On the general online resource description, Facebook's Open Graph and schema.org became industry metadata standards. But, you guessed it, there are multiple community specific and scientific metadata standards, that describe scientific resources in more detail.
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Challenge introduction

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/Challenge6_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>Challenge6.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**: 1 min

> - In the next challenge, we will introduce you to some online metadata standard registries: FAIRsharing.org, the RDA Metadata Directory and the RDA Metadata Standards Catalog. Head over to one or more of these registries and make yourself familiar with their navigation and content. Look specificly for metadata standards, that are associated for your field of research and inspect the information that is provided on the standards. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- In the next challenge, we will introduce you to some online metadata standard registries: FAIRsharing.org, the RDA Metadata Directory and the RDA Metadata Standards Catalog. Head over to one or more of these registries and make yourself familiar with their navigation and content. Look specifically for metadata standards that are associated with your field of research and inspect the information that is provided on the standards. 
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Challenge: Metadata standards

**Time:** 25 min

**Challenge type:** individual exploration, guided confrontation

**Objective:** <br>
The learners are aware of metadata standard registries and know how to navigate them.

**Creator's recommendation:** <br>
After giving the challenge instructions, allow for some time for the learners to explore the registries (ca. 15 min). Start a screen share of one on the metadata registries and navigate to a metadata standard of your liking. Talking points could be:
<ul>
  <li>different representations of metadata standards (JSON / XML schema, RDF, SKOS, OWL)</li>

>   <li>granularity of representation (e.g. high level standard vs. application specific standard)</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li>granularity of representation (e.g. high-level standard vs. application-specific standard)</li>
```

  <li>terms, properties, specifications</li>
  <li>accompanying journal publications</li>
</ul>

**Transition to "(Web) Locations & Identifiers":**

> During the discussion, ask the group of learners, whether someone encountered a `404 Error` while exploring a metadata standard. If you are working with a heterogeneous group in regard of their scientific background, chances are high, that at least one of the learners made this experience (-> it is not unusual that research field specific metadata standard development was concluded and the maintenance of the web representation was terminated with the end of the funding period.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During the discussion, ask the group of learners, whether someone encountered a `404 Error` while exploring a metadata standard. If you are working with a heterogeneous group regarding their scientific background, chances are high, that at least one of the learners had this experience (-> it is not unusual that the development of a metadata standard in a specific research field was concluded and the maintenance of the web representation was terminated at the end of the funding period.)
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Episode 5: (Web) Location & Identifiers
<div class="overview card">
  <h2 class="card-header">Episode Schedule</h2>
  <div class="row g-0">
|&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="feather feather-clock" aria-hidden="true"><circle cx="12" cy="12" r="10"></circle><polyline points="12 6 12 12 16 14"></polyline></svg> | Content type | Title |
| :-----: | ---------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| 2 min | **Group activity** | [PID poll](#accordionInstructor33) |
| XX min | **Lecture** | [Identifier & Web Locations](#accordionInstructor34) |
| XX min | **Guided confrontation** | [Error 404](#accordionInstructor35)
| XX min | **Lecture** | [Persistent Identifier](#accordionInstructor36) |

> | XX min | **Lecture** | [PIDs and metadata records](#accordionInstructor37) |

Reviewer 2: TODO times (I think)

**Learning Objectives:**<br>
<u>REMEMBER</u>
<ul>
  <li>The learners memorize the technology of resource retrieval and client-server communication on the Web.</li>
  <li>The learners are familiar with PIDs and can name examples relevant for research.</li> 
  <li>The learners discover the usage of URLs and PIDs in metadata records.</li>
</ul>
<u>UNDERSTAND</u>
<ul>
  <li>The learners explain the difference between URL, URN, URI and PID(s)</li>
  <li>The learners indicate the advantages of assigning web publications with PIDs in the scientific context.</li>
</ul>

**Description:**<br>
This episode is an introduction to the concept and technology of *persistent identifiers* (PIDs) on the World Wide Web. The learners are familiarized with the technology of client-server communication on the web, learn to differentiate between URN, URL, URI, and PID, and get to know  PID services commonly used in the scientific community. Further, the application of (persistent) identifiers in metadata records is discussed.

**Talking Points:**

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Group activity: PID poll

**Slide set**: -

**Time estimate**: 2 min

> <i>Up to this point, the lesson followed a consistent silver lining. In the last episode, the learners "finished" annotating the example data. The following episode on (persistent) identifiers might seem somewhat disconnected to the previous lesson content at first before the connection is drawn to PIDs in metadata records. Therefore, we like to start off this episode with a quick live poll on PIDs in the scientific content. Together with the previous discussion on 404 Errors during the search for scientific metadata standards, this will prepare the learner for and engage them in the following content.</i>:smile:.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<i>Up to this point, the lesson followed a consistent silver lining. In the last episode, the learners "finished" annotating the example data. The following episode on (persistent) identifiers might seem somewhat disconnected to the previous lesson content at first before the connection is drawn to PIDs in metadata records. Therefore, we like to start this episode with a quick live poll on PIDs in the scientific content. Together with the previous discussion on 404 Errors during the search for scientific metadata standards, this will prepare the learner and engage them in the following content.</i>:smile:.
```

**Creators' recommendation:**<br>
We use [AHA slides](https://ahaslides.com/){target="_blank"} for live polling. Share the link to the poll with the learners and open the presentation mode of the poll on your shared screen.<br>

<u>QUESTION</u><br><br>

1. Does it ring a bell? Which of these terms do you know?
    - DOI
    - ORCID
    - ROR
    - URN
    - PURL
    - IRI

<a href="../../docs/files/exampleAhaslidesPid.png" target="popup" onclick="window.open('../docs/files/exampleAhaslidesPid.png,'popup','width=1200'); return false;" onMouseOver="document.PIDpoll.src='../../docs/files/CLICKexampleAhaslidesPid.png';" onMouseOut="document.PIDpoll.src='../../docs/files/exampleAhaslidesPid.png';"><span><img src="files/exampleAhaslidesPid.png" alt="Screenshot of the recommended live polling session on PIDs." name="PIDpoll"/></span></a>

> (<i>As you can see in the example image above, DOI and ORCID are usually the best known PIDs among the learners. Take a few moments, to comment and reflect on the polling results.</i>)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(<i>As you can see in the example image above, DOI and ORCID are usually the best-known PIDs among the learners. Take a few moments, to comment and reflect on the polling results.</i>)
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Identifier & Web Locations

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/IdentifierWebLocations_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>IdentifierWebLocations.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**: XX min

1. (<i>Bridge from polling results to "Identifier & Web Locations"</i>)

> 2. Remember the first lecture from yesterday? We have had a close look on the metadata in a book. Now if a librarian want to identify a specific publication...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Remember the first lecture from yesterday? We had a close look at the metadata in a book. Now if a librarian wants to identify a specific publication...
```

> 3. they will use its ISBN number for unambiguous identification. This ISBN number follows a standardized structure, which gives valuable information about the resource, such as the group and publisher of the book. This ISBN number is globally unique. Which means it only exists for one specific book and will always lead to the same result, whereever you retrieve it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. they will use its ISBN for unambiguous identification. This ISBN follows a standardized structure, which gives valuable information about the resource, such as the group and publisher of the book. This ISBN is globally unique. Which means it only exists for one specific book and will always lead to the same result, wherever you retrieve it.
```

Reviewer 2: since it is the International Standard Book Number, I thought ISBN number might be redundant.

> 4. And these uniform resource identifiers also exist in the scientific context. Let me give you an example from molecular biology. Let's say, this scientists its is working on genetics and is interested in the functions of a specific gene in the model plant...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. And these uniform resource identifiers also exist in the scientific context. Let me give you an example from molecular biology. Let's say, this scientist is working on genetics and is interested in the functions of a specific gene in the model plant...
```

5. <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. Every gene in the genome / DNA is assigned with a unique identifier, that follows representation conventions. In the case of this model plant, the gene identifier holds information on the species, the chromosome, the type of sequence as well as its location on the chromosome. 
6. To generalize, unique identification codes enable globally unique and persistent identification of a resource. These codes follow conventions in their representation and are registered centrally, enabling a uniform structure of these identifiers globally or in the user community. This makes unique identification codes unambiguous and referencable.
7. (<i>Use this slide to collect unique identification codes in the research fields of the learners. We like to do this in a brief plenary discussion, asking the learners to share unique identifiers, they use regularly and what they represent.</i>)
8. Now we will take this concept of uniform identifiers to the web.

> 9. But first, we will need to define and distinguish between a few terms, that come up frequently in this context. The examples we have seen a couple of minutes ago, are - simply put - a series of structurally harmonized characters that uniquely identify a resource...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
9. But first, we will need to define and distinguish between a few terms, that come up frequently in this context. The examples we have seen a couple of minutes ago are - simply put - a series of structurally harmonized characters that uniquely identify a resource...
```

> 10. The gene identifier we have seen, is basically just a synonym for the gene, which is actually called SULFITE REDUCTASE. In the same sense, your Orcid is just a name for a metadata record describing your academic personality. This is, what we call a URN, Uniform Resource **Name**. We know, what the resource is called, but the name gives no clue, on how we can retrieve the information stored behind this name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
10. The gene identifier we have seen, is basically just a synonym for the gene, which is called SULFITE REDUCTASE. In the same sense, your ORCID is a name for a metadata record describing your academic personality. This is what we call a URN, Uniform Resource **Name**. We know what the resource is called, but the name gives no clue on how we can retrieve the information stored behind this name.
```

11. To do so on the web, we need the address...
12. where we can find the resource with a specific name. The address alone is not enough, though. We also need information on how we can retrieve the resource...

> 13. the communication protocol. We will focus on this technology in a minute. These information are given as a Uniform Resource Locator, URL: a series of characters, that specify the address of a resource and the protocol necessary to retrieve this resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
13. the communication protocol. We will focus on this technology in a minute. This information is given as a Uniform Resource Locator, URL: a series of characters, that specify the address of a resource and the protocol necessary to retrieve this resource.
```

14. Both, URN and URL, can be used to identify a specific resource. You either need the name or the location, to identify data on the web. So URN and URL **are** Uniform Resource Identifier.
15. We will further focus on URLs and the technology hidden behind this string of characters, that we enter to open a resource on the web.

> 16. And for this we take the URL that retrieves the information for our gene example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
16. And for this, we take the URL that retrieves the information for our gene example.
```

> 17. So let's decode this character set: The resource we are looking for, is...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
17. So let's decode this character set: The resource we are looking for is...
```

> 18. hosted on a specific server. On this server, a certain file path needs to be followed, that will lead to the resource. The final resource might be stored in a data base structure. So the necessary query parameter are specified that lead to the data base entry for the requested resource. And don't forget, we will need to follow a specific protocol, in this case HTTPS, in order to communicate with the host server. HTTPS is an extension of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol, that uses encryption technology for secure communication on the network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
18. hosted on a specific server. On this server, a certain file path needs to be followed, that will lead to the resource. The final resource might be stored in a data base structure. So the necessary query parameters that lead to the database entry for the requested resource are also specified. And don't forget, we will need to follow a specific protocol, in this case, HTTPS, in order to communicate with the host server. HTTPS is an extension of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol, that uses encryption technology for secure communication on the network.
```

19. If we now enter this URL in our browser, the browser sends a HTTP request to the host server.

> 20. This request specifies, that the browser wants to **GET** a resource stored under a **specific path** from the **host** and follows the specific HTTP protocol that is used for communication, so which is also expected by the browser of the server response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
20. This request specifies, that the browser wants to **GET** a resource stored under a **specific path** from the **host** and follows the specific HTTP protocol that is used for communication, which is also expected by the browser of the server response.
```

> 21. The host server than looks up the specified file path locally. Finds the requested file and...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
21. The host server then looks up the specified file path locally. Finds the requested file and...
```

22. sends back the HTTP response, with the requested resource.

> 23. The response also includes a status code. The code "200: ok" tells the client server, that send the request, "I have found the file you requested. Here you go!". There are various status codes for server-client communication, but for now, we will focus on the most common ones. The client, your browser, receives the response with the resource attached and..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
23. The response also includes a status code. The code "200: ok" tells the client-server, that sends the request, "I have found the file you requested. Here you go!". There are various status codes for server-client communication, but for now, we will focus on the most common ones. The client, your browser, receives the response with the resource attached and ...
```

24. displays it.
25. But I'm fairly sure, we have all experienced this situation: You are looking for publications online, be it data or a journal article. The abstract is super promising and you want to retrieve the PDF...
26. but instead of the publication, you are faced with an **Error 404**. 

> 27. So what happened here? You click on the link and the familiar HTTP request is send by your browser to the host server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
27. So what happened here? You click on the link and the familiar HTTP request is sent by your browser to the host server.
```

28. Again, the browser follows the file path but it is leading into the void. No file with this path. 

> 29. And this is, what the host server communicates back to your browser. The HTTP response now contains the status code **404 Not Found**. Let's take a look on this client-server communication in action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
29. And this is, what the host server communicates back to your browser. The HTTP response now contains the status code **404 Not Found**. Let's take a look at this client-server communication in action.
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
# Guided confrontation: Error 404

**Time**: 2 min

**Narrative / Teaching script**: <br>
<ul>

>   <li><i>Share an empty browser tap on your screen.</i></li> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li><i>Share an empty browser tab on your screen.</i></li> 
```

  <li><i>Open the network editor.</i> </li>
  <li><i>Open any desired website in your browser. This might be a good point to share your organizational, institutional, or personal homepage with the learners for some "hidden" marketing</i> :wink:.</li>

>   <li><i>You can whitness all the requests and responses in the network editor, while the page is loading</i>.</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li><i>You can witness all the requests and responses in the network editor, while the page is loading</i>.</li>
```

>   <li><i>Highlight that each element - html documents, images, etc - require individual requests in order to build the website and the `200: ok` status codes that are send back with the resources.</i></li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li><i>Highlight that each element - HTML documents, images, etc - require individual requests in order to build the website and the `200: ok` status codes that are sent back with the resources.</i></li>
```

>   <li>**Optional:** <i>Take a closer look on the different status codes or the HTTP responses.</i></li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li>**Optional:** <i>Take a closer look at the different status codes or the HTTP responses.</i></li>
```

  <li><i>Enforce an Error 404, e.g. by deleting one character in the file path. The status code 404 will appear in the status code column of the network editor.</i></li>
</ul>

<a href="../../docs/files/exampleError404.png" target="popup" onclick="window.open('../docs/files/exampleError404.png,'popup','width=1200'); return false;" onMouseOver="document.Error404.src='../../docs/files/CLICKexampleError404.png';" onMouseOut="document.Error404.src='../../docs/files/exampleError404.png';"><span><img src="files/exampleError404.png" alt="Screenshot of the recommended live coding session." name="Error404"/></span></a>

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Persistent Identifier

**Slide set**: <a href="../files/slideSet/PersistentIdentifier_CarpentriesIncubator_ScientificMetadata.pdf" target="_blank" download>PersistentIdentifier.pdf</a>

**Time estimate**: XX min

> 1. Simplified, there could be two reasons, why you end up with a 404 status code: Either you can't spell, or the resource path is broken.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Simplified, there could be two reasons why you end up with a 404 status code: Either you can't spell, or the resource path is broken.
```

> 2. How do path's break.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. How do paths break?
```

> 3. The URL you want to retrieve points to specific resources, stored on the host server. But within the life cycle of an online resource, several events can take place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The URL you want to retrieve points to specific resources, which are stored on the host server. But within the life cycle of an online resource, several events can take place.
```

> 4. The file path on the host server might change, the resource might be migrated to a different host server, or the resource might simply be deleted. In any of these cases, the URL does not specify the exact location of the resource any longer and will no longer be retrievable by the server adressed by the GET-request you send from your browser. This process is also referred to as "link rot". Remember, that we classified the URL as a form of Uniform Resource Identifier? This means, that link rot leads results in the resource loosing a very important identifier!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. The file path on the host server might change, the resource might be migrated to a different host server, or the resource might simply be deleted. In any of these cases, the URL does not specify the exact location of the resource any longer and will no longer be retrievable by the server addressed by the **GET** request you send from your browser. This process is also referred to as "link rot". Remember, that we classified the URL as a form of Uniform Resource Identifier? This means that link rot results in the resource losing a very important identifier!
```

5. Web technology has a solution for this issue: Persistent Identifiers or short, PIDs.

> 6. Like our other persistent and unique identifiers, such as ISBN numbers, PIDs are long-lasting references to digital objects on the web. Any resource that has a representation on the web - articles, datasets, persons, instruments - can have a PID assigned. These PIDs remain constant over time, lead directly to the resource - so they also give information on the location and protocol - and, thus, ensure permanent identifiability, refencabilty and retrievability of online resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Like our other persistent and unique identifiers, such as ISBNs, PIDs are long-lasting references to digital objects on the web. Any resource that has a representation on the web - articles, datasets, persons, instruments - can have a PID assigned. These PIDs remain constant over time, lead directly to the resource - so they also give information on the location and protocol - and, thus, ensure permanent identifiability, referenceability and retrievability of online resources.
```

7. The technology behind PIDs is fairly trivial. In PID databases, a PID is mapped to a URL, that retrieves a resource. Even though the URL changes, due to server migration or changes in the file path, the PID remains consistent.
8. If you activate a hyperlink in your browser to retrieve a resource without a PID service included, your browser will directly communicate with the host server to retrieve a resource.
9. If the requested resource is identified by a PID, the underlying PID service will be contacted by the browser. The PID service will then query its database for the PID, identify the current URL of the resource and redirect the request to the host server.
10. So when the location of the resource changes...
11. a PID will not lead to unretrievable resources and rotten links...
12. as the new URL is stored in the PID database and the activated link will redirect the request to the new location.

> 13. It is important to know, that the PID service **only** provides the **technical infrastructure** for redirections. The owner of the host server of the requeste resource - which could be a privat person, a journal that published an article or a repository that holds a dataset - **is responsible for updating the URL**. For example: You publish an article and one of the journals features is, that they assign a DOI to this article. If the journal now changes the digital location of your article on their server, the journal is responsible to inform the PID provider - DOI - about the changes and update the location.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
13. It is important to know, that the PID service **only** provides the **technical infrastructure** for redirections. The owner of the host server of the requested resource - which could be a private person, a journal that published an article, or a repository that holds a dataset - **is responsible for updating the URL**. For example, you publish an article and the journal assigns a DOI to this article. If the journal now changes the digital location of your article on their server, the journal is responsible to inform the PID provider - DOI - about the changes and update the location.
```

> 14. As we have seen in our poll at the beginning of this lecture, many of you are already familiar with Digital Object Identifiers and ORCID Ids. Other PIDs that ar frequently used in the scientific context are Persisten Uniform Resource Locators, RORs - the Research Organization Registry, and ARKS - Archival Resource Keys.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
14. As we have seen in our poll at the beginning of this lecture, many of you are already familiar with Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) and ORCIDs. Other PIDs that are frequently used in the scientific context are Persistent Uniform Resource Locators (PURLs), RORs - the Research Organization Registry, and ARKS - Archival Resource Keys.
```

> 15. <i>allow for some time for questions</i>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
15. <i>Allow some time for questions.</i>
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: PIDs and metadata records

**Slide set**: <i>WILL BE ADDED LATER</i>

> **Time estimate**: XX min

Reviewer 2: TODO

**Slide set**: <i>not provided in slide set</i><br>
**Time estimate**: 5 min

:construction: **UNDER CONSTRUCTION** :construction:

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

<br><br>

---

### :coffee: 15 min Break :coffee:

---

## Episode 0: Lightning Talk
<div class="overview card">
  <h2 class="card-header">Episode Schedule</h2>
  <div class="row g-0">
|&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="feather feather-clock" aria-hidden="true"><circle cx="12" cy="12" r="10"></circle><polyline points="12 6 12 12 16 14"></polyline></svg> | Content type | Title |
| :-----: | ---------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| 30 min | **Lecture** | [Lightning Talk](#accordionInstructor40) |
| 15 min | **Group activity** | [Q&A with invited speaker](#accordionInstructor40) |

</div>
</div>

**Total time:** 45 min <br>
**Teaching methods:** direct teaching, group activity <br>
**Learning types:** acquisition <br><br>

**Learning Objectives:**<br>
<u>REMEMBER</u>
<ul>

>   <li>The learners discover a real world example of a research metadata topic.</li> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <li>The learners discover a real-world example of a research metadata topic.</li> 
```

**Time estimate**: 10 min

**Creators' recommendation:**<br>
see also [Feedback Day 1](#accordionInstructor18)

<u>QUESTIONS</u><br><br>

1. **How do you generally feel about the lesson "Fundamentals of Scientific Metadata"?**
    - :frowning_face:
    - :confused:
    - :neutral_face:
    - :slightly_smiling_face:
    - :smiley: 
    
2. **Please rate the difficulty level of the lecture content.**
    - too easy
    - fairly easy
    - just right
    - rather hard
    - too hard

3. **Please rate the difficulty level of the hands-on sessions.**
    - too easy
    - fairly easy
    - just right
    - rather hard
    - too hard
    
4. **I really liked about this training...**<br>
    [FREE TEXT]
    
5. **This could be improved:**<br>
    [FREE TEXT]

6. **I would have liked to learn more about...**<br>
    [FREE TEXT]
    
7. **Dear Instructors...**<br>
    [FREE TEXT]
 
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor
## Lecture: Instructor Feedback & Farewell

**Slide set**: <i>not provided in slide set</i><br>
**Time estimate**: 5 min

> <i>We do believe, that giving feedback is important for instructors as well as learners. So we would like to encourage you to reflect your experiences with the closing lesson and communicate them to your group of learners</i> :relaxed: .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<i>We do believe, that giving feedback is important for instructors as well as learners. So we would like to encourage you to reflect on your experiences with the closing lesson and communicate them to your group of learners</i> :relaxed: .
```
